Recipe for coupled pallets (#272)
JoshOrndorff/recipes: text/3-entrees/storage-api/map-set.md

# Using Maps as Sets

_[`pallets/map-set`](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/recipes/tree/master/pallets/map-set)_

A [Set](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Set_(abstract_data_type)>) is an unordered data structure
that stores entries without duplicates. Substrate's storage API does not provide a way to declare
sets explicitly, but they can be implemented using either vectors or maps.

This recipe shows how to implement a storage set on top of a map, and explores the performance of
the implementation. When implementing a set in your own runtime, you should compare this technique
to implementing a [`vec-set`](./vec-set.md).

> In this pallet we implement a set of `AccountId`s. We do not do not use the set for anything in this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this pallet we implement a set of `AccountId`s. We do not use the set for anything in this
```

> pallet; we merely maintain its membership. Using the set is, demonstrated in the recipe on [pallet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pallet; we simply maintain its membership. Using the set is demonstrated in the recipe on [pallet
```

coupling](./pallet-couplin.md]. We provide dispatchable calls to add and remove members, ensuring
that the number of members never exceeds a hard-coded maximum.

```rust, ignore
/// A maximum number of members. When membership reaches this number, no new members may join.
pub const MAX_MEMBERS: u32 = 16;
```

## Storage Item

We will store the members of our set as the keys in one of Substrate's
[`StorageMap`](https://crates.parity.io/frame_support/storage/trait.StorageMap.html)s. There is also

> a recipe specifically about [using storage maps](./storage-maps.md). The storage map itself does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a recipe specifically about [using storage maps](./storage-maps.md). The storage map itself does not
```

> track its size, so we introduce a second storage value for this purpose.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
track its size internally, so we introduce a second storage value for this purpose.
```

```rust, ignore
decl_storage! {
	trait Store for Module<T: Trait> as VecMap {
		// The set of all members. The bool value is useless and will always be
		// true. It is necessary because the underlying storage can't distinguish

> 		// between 0-byte values and non-existant values so () can't be used.

Reviewer 2: As commented above I think this comment needs some work. I'd also consider removing it here as it doesn't seem to be directly related to what is being discussed?

> 		// The set of all members. The bool value is useless and will always be
> 		// true. It is necessary because the underlying storage can't distinguish
> 		// between 0-byte values and non-existant values so () can't be used.

Author: ```suggestion
		// The set of all members.
```

		Members get(fn members): map hasher(blake2_128_concat) T::AccountId => bool;
		// The total number of members stored in the map.

> 		// Because the map does no store its size, we must store it separately

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		// Because the map does not store its size, we must store it separately
```

		MemberCount: u32;
	}
}
```

As the code comment says, we will not associate any meaning with the _value_ stored in the map; we

> only care about hte keys. As a convention, the value will always be `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only care about the keys. As a convention, the value will always be `true`.
```

## Adding Members

Any user may join the membership set by calling the `add_member` dispatchable, so long as they are
not already a member and the membership limit has not been reached. We check for these two
conditions first, and then insert the new member only after we are sure it is safe to do so.

```rust, ignore
fn add_member(origin) -> DispatchResult {
	let new_member = ensure_signed(origin)?;

	let member_count = MemberCount::get();
	ensure!(member_count < MAX_MEMBERS, Error::<T>::MembershipLimitReached);

	// We don't want to add duplicate members, so we check whether the potential new
	// member is already present in the list. Because the membership is stored as a hash
	// map this check is constant time O(1)
	ensure!(!Members::<T>::contains_key(&new_member), Error::<T>::AlreadyMember);

	// Insert the new member and emit the event
	Members::<T>::insert(&new_member, true);
	MemberCount::put(member_count + 1); // overflow check not necessary because of maximum
	Self::deposit_event(RawEvent::MemberAdded(new_member));
	Ok(())
}
```

> When we do successfully add a new member, we also manually update the size of the set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When we successfully add a new member, we also manually update the size of the set.
```

## Removing a Member

> Removing a member is entirely straightforward. We begin by looking for the caller in the list. If

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Removing a member is straightforward. We begin by looking for the caller in the list. If
```

> the caller is not present, there is no work to be done. If the caller is present, we simply remove

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the not present, there is no work to be done. If the caller is present, we simply remove
```

Author: ```suggestion
not present, there is no work to be done. If the caller is present, we simply remove
```

> her and update the size of the set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
them and update the size of the set.
```

```rust, ignore
fn remove_member(origin) -> DispatchResult {
	let old_member = ensure_signed(origin)?;

	ensure!(Members::<T>::contains_key(&old_member), Error::<T>::NotMember);

	Members::<T>::remove(&old_member);
	MemberCount::mutate(|v| *v -= 1);
	Self::deposit_event(RawEvent::MemberRemoved(old_member));
	Ok(())
}
```

## Performance

Now that we have built our set, let's analyze its performance in some common operations.

### Membership Check

In order to check for the presence of an item in a map set, we make a single storage read. If we
only care about the presence or absence of the item, we don't even need to decode it. This constant
time membership check is the greatest strength of a map set.

DB Reads: O(1)

### Updating

> Updates to the set, such as adding and removing members, like we demonstrated, requires first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updates to the set, such as adding and removing members as we demonstrated, requires first
```

performing a membership check. Additions also require encooding the new item.

DB Reads: O(1) Encoding: O(1) DB Writes: O(1)

If your set operations will require a lot of membership checks or mutation of individual items, you

> may want a `map-set`.

Reviewer: Can you elaborate on these points a bit?

### Iteration

Iterating over all items in a `map-set` is achieved by using the
[`IterableStorageMap` trait](https://crates.parity.io/frame_support/storage/trait.IterableStorageMap.html),

> which iterates `(key, value)` pairs (although we don't care about the values). Because each map

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which iterates `(key, value)` pairs (although in this case, we don't care about the values). Because each map
```

> entry is stored as an individual tree node, iterating a map set requires a database read for each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
entry is stored as an individual trie node, iterating a map set requires a database read for each
```
?

Reviewer 2: Are you positive about the one DB read per node here? https://crates.parity.io/frame_support/storage/trait.IterableStorageMap.html does not mention this important caveat.

Author: I'm pretty sure this is right. I believe this is the call to storage in each invocation of the `next` method. [frame/support/src/storage/generator/map.rs#L115](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/4c29f1ce5b2ca0fe21f24e3dffe4763ced32cab5/frame/support/src/storage/generator/map.rs#L115) You can also see the decoding right below.

I've never looked at this part of the code before. Does my understanding seem correct to you?

Reviewer 2: It certainly looks that way. I traced it to [here](https://github.com/paritytech/trie/blob/5281fdfffa403a565fa62bfbc2b05225ff9ed8ba/trie-db/src/lib.rs#L200) then I sort of gave up, but I'm pretty sure that'll hit the db as you say. Interesting!

> item. Finally, the actual processing you do on the items will take some time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
item. Finally, the actual processing of the items will take some time.
```

DB Reads: O(n) Decoding: O(n) Processing: O(n)

Because accessing the database is a relatively slow operation, returning to the database for each
item is quite expensive. If your set operations will require frequent iterating, you will probably

> prefer a [`vec-set`](./vec-set.md).

Reviewer: I think a little more elaboration would be nice here as well.

### A Note on Weights

It is always important that the weight associated with your dispatchables represent the actual time

> it takes to execute them. In this pallet we have provided an upper bound on the size of the set,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it takes to execute them. In this pallet, we have provided an upper bound on the size of the set,
```

> which places an upper bound on the computation. Thus we get away with constant weight annotations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which places an upper bound on the computation - this means we can use constant weight annotations.
```

> Your set operations should either have a maximum size, or a custom weight function that captures the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your set operations should either have a maximum size or a custom weight function that captures the
```

> Your set operations should either have a maximum size or a custom weight function that captures the

Author: ```suggestion
Your set operations should either have a maximum size or a [custom weight function](./weights.html) that captures the
```

> computation appropriately.

Reviewer: Are you able to link to something that demonstrates this?
